---
title: Cutlass
subtitle: An IDE for Pyret, a teaching language.
link: https://github.com/gauravmm/Hexapod-IK
---

{% include blogimage src="top.png" %}

[Pyret](http://www.pyret.org/) is a teaching language by the [Brown Programming Languages Team](https://cs.brown.edu/research/plt/). It is used to teach an introductory class in Brown. At the time of writing, there is no IDE available for Pyret, and this project hopes to fill this need.

__Update__: Pyret has moved on significantly, and there is an excellent online IDE. The language specification and runtime have also changed significantly, and so this IDE is no longer usable.

In a class on software development, I lead a team of three other programmers to write this IDE over the span of six weeks.

# Features

Like any good IDE, Cutlass contains appropriate syntax highlighting, find-and-replace features, automatic indentation, an undo/redo stack, etc. In addition to these, there are some Pyret-specific features.

## Call Graph 

{% include blogimage src="data-callgraph.jpg" %}

Cutlass understands how control flows through Pyret code. Recursive functions, functions as arguments, functions called and calling functions — we keep track of all these. In the quick navigation bar, data types are color-coded. When editing a function, all caller and callee functions are highlighted, and recursion and mutual recursion is separately displayed.

## Scope-Aware 

{% include blogimage src="token-highlighting.jpg" %}

Cutlass understands how scope works in Pyret, and is able to automatically highlight tokens that mean the same thing.

## Error Detection

{% include blogimage src="well-formedness.jpg" %}

Cutlass detects common errors in Pyret relating to well-formedness of code. It highlights these errors and provides a user-friendly error message.

# Laskura

{% include blogimage src="laskura-login.png" %}

Cutlass runs like any other offline IDE, reading, writing, and running code all on the local system. Cutlass can instead connect to a _Laskura_ server, and do all these remotely. This feature was designed so that educators could use Pyret without requiring the language be installed on a local system. This was made possible by a cleverly designed abstraction mechanism that decouples Cutlass from the system its run on. 
