---
title: Oboe Reed Box
subtitle: Laser-cut and printed box.
---

{% include blogimage src="reedbox_lead.jpg" caption="The reed holder with a sample reed." %}

Professional oboists keep many reeds with them. These have fragile wood tips and must be carried with care. Here’s a sample oboe reed:

{% include blogimage src="sample_oboe_reed.jpg" caption="Oboe reed" %}

# The Competition

Commercial carrying cases are expensive. Here are some examples from [Edmund Nielsen Woodwinds](https://www.nielsen-woodwinds.com/en/):

{% include blogimage src="enw1.png" caption="Reed cases from [Edmund Nielsen Woodwinds](https://www.nielsen-woodwinds.com/en/)" %}

# Design

The reed box was designed parametrically in Fusion 360, with a sample render:

{% include blogimage src="render1.png" caption="Fusion 360 render." %}

I used a folding parallelogram design for the moving parts and verified that the movement could open and close with Fusion’s built-in motion study tools. The entire box is designed to be laser cut from 3mm acrylic and birch plywood, with a 3d-printed magnetic latch to hold it close. The mechanical movement was initially designed to use 3d-printed pins, but the pin diameter was too small for a 3d printed part. The updated design is assembled using M2.5 screws and nuts:

{% include youtube id="zcOC3vvTurY" %}

# Construction

The body is made from laser-cut wood that is glued together. We cover the acrylic parts with tape to prevent offgassing residue, and clamp to ensure a strong bond:

{% include blogimage src="clamp_and_glue.jpg" %}

## Movement
{% include blogimage src="reed_movement_parts.jpg" %}

The reed carriage itself is made by stacking and gluing four identical laser-cut cross sections. Some compressible felt is glued over the top to provide friction to retain the reeds. Each reed box requires 8 nuts, and 6 screws (of varying sizes). We apply Loctite Blue 242 threadlocker on some nuts to prevent the pieces from coming apart under repeated articulation.

## Wood Stain
{% include blogimage src="wood_stain_samples.jpg" caption="From left to right: MinWax crimson water-based stain with boiled linseed oil, MinWax Gel Mahogany stain, and MinWax crimson water-based stain (double)" %}

We used Minwax water-based and gel stains to stain the wood. After some experimentation, we discovered that the best process is to stain the wood before cutting. The stain only penetrates a little way through the wood, so we can also engrave patterns into the wood:

{% include blogimage src="penguin_etch.jpg" caption="We raster engrave a penguin on the bottom of the box." %}

## Latch
The latch is the only 3d printed component in the project. A pair of 7mm neodymium magnets are used to hold the latch closed.

{% include blogimage src="latch.jpg" caption="The latch is glued onto the box." %}

## Adhesives
We use five different adhesives to assemble the box. Here’s the breakdown:

{% include blogimage src="adhesives.png" %}

# Closing

Here it is, fully assembled, and monogrammed with a repeating B.

{% include blogimage src="reed_box_closing.jpg" %}
